---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Streams"
date:   2023-11-28
categories: [programming]
permalink: streams
description: "Notes on Streams"
---

One of the most interesting concepts in computer science to me is the concept of a stream. They are such useful abstractions that they appear in many different contexts
- In Unix, streams are used as an I/O abstraction. Everyone knows that stdin and stdout are streams, but even files are managed as streams when you use formatted I/O functions like `fprintf()`
- In Scheme, streams are just lazy lists. This is useful for writing functions which manipulate large (or infinite) lists. You can get the result of a computation on part of your list without doing any more work than necessary.
- The data in log-based message brokers like Kafka are often thought of as a stream (and computation on it is referred to as stream processing)
- A stream is the core metaphor behind TCP communication
- On Unix, in addition to the STREAM datatype, I/O communication in general (including over TCP sockets) is thought of as reading and writing to a stream. Most interprocess communication, whether over sockets or pipes, is through this abstraction.

In fact, you might choose to extend the concept of a stream to include a broader category of programming abstractions like queues, messages, events and even asynchrony:
- One key consideration is order. Log-based message brokers like Kafka preserve it, traditional message brokers like RabbitMQ don't.
- In the context of DDD, event sourcing is a design pattern that builds application logic around events
- In fact, any event-based system might be thought of involving a type of stream insofar as event-based systems respond to events (perform computation) on single events at a time without waiting for the entire history of data to be available.
- Many programming language that offer a concurrency model based around message passing, like the actor model (e.g. Erlang) or communicating sequential processes (e.g. Go).
- Any asynchronous programming models involve the idea of an an event loop.
